[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
PROFESSOR: We have
seen, I would say,
three sets of tools applied
to the problem of projection
theory.
So at the beginning
of the class, first,
we talked about double counting.
And then we talked about
methods from Fourier analysis.
And then in the last week,
we started our third set
of tools which are tools from
combinatorial number theory.
So this week we're
going to finish our unit
on tools from
combinatorial number
theory in projection theory.
So the goal for these two weeks
is this projection theorem
of Bourgain, Katz, and Tao.
It takes place
over finite fields,
and the cool thing about it is
that it distinguishes what's
true over prime
fields from what's
true over other fields, which
none of our previous methods
could distinguish.
This is our goal.
It says that if x is a
subset of Fp squared,
and it has size p to the sx--
you can think of sx
like a dimension--
and sx is in between 0 and 2.
So it's not too tiny,
and it's not everything.
And we have a set
of directions in Fp,
a set of directions as size p to
the sd, and it's not too tiny.
Then, if I take the
maximum over all
of the directions of the
size of the projection
in that direction,
it's at least--
so the square root of x.
So far, that's not
difficult to do.
But then plus-- times
a little bit more,
times p to the epsilon.
I'll call it epsilon--
p to the epsilon.
So this epsilon depends on these
dimensions, but it's positive.
So that's our goal.
And it's significant
that this would not
be true in other fields.
So this is false in Fq
squared if q equals p squared.
And the example is that x
is Fp squared, and D is Fp.
And so then this
thing is always Fp.
Cool.
So even though this epsilon
is a really tiny number, which
we could make explicit
if we worked hard,
but we would then
be disappointed.
Even though it's really
tiny, this theorem
is qualitatively an
important improvement,
and it has lots of applications.
This and the version over r
have lots of applications,
and almost everything in
the rest of the course
will be based on that, kind of
whatever most of the directions
we might go in.
All right, so last week, we
introduced combinatorial number
theory and some product theory.
And we proved a theorem,
which is in this direction.
It's kind of the
special case when
x happens to be a product set--
A cross A. So our Theorem 1
was last time, if A is in Fp,
and the size of
A is p to the sa,
and D is the set of directions
in Fp, and size of D
is p to the sd.
Then, if you take the
maximum t and D, of A plus t
times A, which would be
like pi sub t of A cross A,
then that's at least the size
of A times p to the epsilon 1.
That's a little bit bigger.
And this, again, would
be false in other fields.
So if our field
had a subfield, you
could choose these guys
to both be the subfield.
And this would stay
in the subfield.
Cool.
All right, so our goal today
is to get from here to there.
And we were talking
about it last time,
and I wanted to-- so
at first this looks
like a very special case.
I'll try to argue that it's
only a little bit special case,
and we'll see what the issue is.
We call this an attempt
at BKT using Theorem 1.
So we're going to do a
proof by contradiction.
We're going to say
epsilon is very small,
and it's to be decided.
And so then we'll assume
that pi t of x is less than x
to the half times p to the
epsilon for all the ts in D.
So proof by contradiction,
so we can assume that.
And also, without
loss of generality,
we can suppose that
0 and infinity are
in our set of directions,
D. So in other words,
we include the
horizontal projection
and the vertical projection.
So then we can make a set,
A, so that A times A contains
x And x is most of A times A. So
the set A is pi 0 of x, union pi
infinity of x, or the size of A
bounded by size of x to the half
times p to the epsilon.
And x is contained in A times A.
So x is a big
subset of a product,
and we can apply Theorem
1 to our product.
So theorem one tells us
that the maximum t and D
of pi t of A times A is big.
And even bigger than that,
so this could be epsilon 1.
And epsilon 1 is much
bigger than epsilon.
So epsilon 1 came from a
theorem that's already proven.
It's some number.
And we get to choose
epsilon as small as we like,
so we choose it much
smaller than epsilon.
But this is not yet
the projection theorem
that we're aiming for.
And the issue is we would
like pi t of x to be big.
So the issue is, maybe pi t
of x is much smaller than pi
t of A cross A. Even though x
is a big chunk of A cross A.
Let me make a picture
of this enemy scenario.
So here's the enemy scenario.
All right, so there's a set x
which has a small projection.
So we're going to be
doing a projection, say,
in this direction.
Projection of x is small.
And x is a big portion of
this larger set, A cross A.
So in blue, we have
A cross A without x.
And when we project that down,
then we see a lot of stuff.
Pi of t, A cross A without x.
So we're worried that
we may be so unlucky
that even though
pi t of A cross A
is quite large, and even though
x is a big chunk of A cross A,
nevertheless, pi
t of x is small.
We're worried about that.
So that's where we left
off before vacation.
And now what I'd
like everyone to do
is to try to think of an
example where this happens.
Does this ever actually happen
that inside of A cross A,
you have a large subset
x, and the projection
of x is small, even though the
projection of A cross A is big?
Can you think of an example
where that actually happens?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: You could choose
x to be like the diagonal--
like all the values like, I
guess, pi I for I is in Fp.
PROFESSOR: Right.
So here's an example.
So x is going to be
contained in A cross
A. X is the set of all
A comma A in A cross A.
And so then if I take
the projection, I guess,
in the direction minus
1 of x, I just get 0.
A minus A is always 0.
So this is extremely
small But in this case,
this x is quite a bit
smaller than the whole
A cross A. So let me make
a more precise question.
So let's say A has size N. And
x is a subset of A cross A,
and it's really quite big.
So I'm going to say
x is bigger than--
well, we're going to call it for
now K inverse times N squared.
But then maybe K is order
of N to the 1 over 1,000.
So it's really a big
portion of A cross A.
And pi t of x is
like way smaller
than pi t of A cross A. We
could make that more precise
too, if we wanted to.
And that's the situation
we have in our attempt.
A is only a bit bigger than x.
And so let's say
the size of A is
N. It's just the
definition of N.
And then x would be bigger
than like p to the minus
a few epsilon size of A
cross A. So it's really
a good portion of that.
So could it still happen that
the size of the projection of x
is way smaller than the
size of the projection
of the whole thing?
AUDIENCE: This is like--
can you pigeonhole
principle somehow,
like the fibers of the
projection of A cross A?
PROFESSOR: Yeah.
AUDIENCE: And then
if x is big enough,
you know it has to be at
least some nice number.
I don't know.
PROFESSOR: So the
suggestion is we
can look at all of the fibers
of the projection of A cross A,
and then we should pick x to
be the union of the big fibers.
Yeah.
That's right.
So in this enemy
scenario, there have
to be some very big fibers and
some much smaller fibers that
have to be kind different
from each other.
Yeah.
But let's see if we can think of
an example where this happens.
What I should erase--
probably still have some space.
So I'm just going to
continue below the line here.
So first of all, can we
even think of an example
where the projection of x or of
something would be small at all?
So an example, maybe x could
be the numbers from 1 up to N
cross the numbers from 1
up to N. And then pi 1 of x
is pretty small.
It would be basically
integers from 1 up to 2N,
so this would be quite small.
So you could make this A. So
x would be all of A cross A.
Then the projection of A
cross A would be small.
But you could also inflate A
to make it bigger than that.
So we could take A to be
the integers from 1 up to N
union, A tilde.
Maybe this size of
A tilde is also N,
but A tilde is
unstructured or random.
So now if I take
pi 1 of A cross A,
it's at least as big as pi
1 of A tilde cross A tilde.
And A tilde has nothing to
do with the numbers from 1
up to N. I could build
some set where that's big.
But pi 1 of x is only
around N. So there could be
a big gap between these guys.
But this example is not so--
not such a problem
for our strategy.
Because in this example,
we just should have chosen
the set A smaller like A to B.
We could choose as we like.
We could choose a
smaller set A so
that A actually with the smaller
choice of A, just these guys, x
would be A cross A. And
then we would be happy.
So the key to the
proof of Bougain, Katz,
Tao is a theorem
from combinatorics
called the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem.
And it says that this
example is pretty much
the only way that pi 1 of x
could be much smaller than pi1
of A cross A.
So, this is called the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem.
And it's another of the central
tools in the toolbox of additive
combinatorics, along with the
Plünnecke-Ruzsa inequalities
that we talked about last time.
All right.
So it says, if A and B are
contained in an abelian group
and they have size
at most, N. And I
have a subset of A cross
B, which is significant--
a significant fraction.
And the projection of this
subset in some direction
is small.
All right.
So, here, I want you
to imagine that K
is a lot smaller
than N. So, this
is a big chunk of all
the pairs, A and B.
And the smallest this could
possibly be is around N,
because if you just
fix one element of B,
you'd have around N choices
for this element of A.
So that would already
give you around N here.
So, this is almost
as small as possible.
And then, the conclusion is,
it's not necessarily the case
that pi T of all of
A cross B is small.
We just saw a
counterexample to that.
But we could find
big pieces of A and B
so that the projection of
the big pieces is small.
So, then, there exists
A prime and B prime,
which are subsets of A and B.
A prime and A, B prime and B,
so that, I'll say, x prime is
defined to be A prime cross
B prime, intersect, x.
And x prime is still a
big fraction of N squared.
So, K to the minus some
constant power, times N squared.
And if I take pi T
of A prime cross B
prime, that is less than K
to some power times N. So,
this is small.
So in this example here,
where A was like this,
this part here would
be the A prime.
And it would be symmetric.
B prime and A prime
would both be this.
OK, take a moment to
digest that statement
and see if you have
questions or comments.
OK.
So, we will prove this
probably starting later today,
but most of it next class.
But for the rest of
this class, we'll
explore why this is useful.
And in particular, we'll use it
to prove the projection theorem,
OK?
Cool.
All right.
So, let's do the proof of the
Bourgain-Katz-Tao projection
theorem.
So, let's say epsilon
is small, to be decided.
So we're going to prove,
there's some small epsilon
where this is true.
And I'm going to write
C less than tilde, tilde
D. It means that C is less
than p to the big O of epsilon,
times D.
OK.
And, now, we're going to do
a proof by contradiction.
So we can suppose pi T of
x is less than or equal
to p to the epsilon, times x to
the half, for all the T and D.
OK.
Without loss of
generality, I can
suppose that 0 or infinity
are in my directions.
And I'll take A to be pi 0
of x union, pi infinity of x.
And so, now, I know that x
is a subset of A cross A.
I'll say, A, the
size of A could be N.
And that is tilde,
tilde, the square root
of x, up to some powers
of p to the epsilon.
OK.
And, therefore, x is greater
tilde, tilde, N squared.
So x is a big fraction of
all of A cross N. Cool.
Next, I choose
some other T1 in D.
And I know that pi T1 of x
is less than tilde, tilde, N.
And so, once I know this, the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem
tells me that this comes from a
product, A prime, A prime cross
B prime.
So, Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers says,
this A prime in A, B prime in B.
And x prime is the part of x
and its product, A prime cross B
prime.
So, first of all, x prime
is still quite substantial.
And pi T1 of A prime
cross B prime is small.
And this means, in other
words, that A prime plus T1 B
prime is small.
And this here is--
this information here is
strong in a helpful way.
It's stronger than
this, because, here, we
can use the Plunnecke-Ruzsa
inequalities.
So, once we know that A prime
plus T1 B prime is small,
then Plünnecke-Ruzsa
inequalities tell us that lots
of other things are small.
So, for example, A prime, plus
or minus A prime, is also small.
If I wanted to, I could
do a triple sum, A prime,
plus A prime, plus A prime,
is also small, dot, dot, dot.
You could do the
same with B prime.
OK.
So, now, we see that A prime and
B prime have a lot of structure,
have a lot of structure.
And, actually, I'll
use the word, symmetry.
All right.
OK.
Actually, I'll
draw you a picture
in a minute of how
I visualize this,
and why I use the word symmetry.
OK.
So, next.
Sorry, I have to make space.
I'm going to erase the
statement of the theorem.
We're going to try to prove
that one of the projections of x
is big.
All right.
So, now, we have
a lemma that says,
if I have a subset y in
A prime cross B prime--
the subset we're going to
care about is just x prime.
But the lemma is more general.
And A prime and B prime
have these nice properties.
So, I'll just copy these two.
A prime plus T1
B prime is small.
A prime minus A prime is small.
And y itself is fairly
large, although I don't need
to write it in the statement.
Then.
pi T of y-- so this
is for any T. So,
T is just anybody in
Fp, different from T1.
This guy is bigger
than, tilde, tilde,
y over N squared, times pi
in a different direction,
T over T1, of A
prime cross A prime.
So, we have-- the
biggest y it could be is,
it could have size around
N squared, in which case
this would disappear.
And so, I said, if we have a
large subset of A prime cross B
prime, then the projection
of that large subset y
is bigger than the
projection and related
angle of a whole product,
A prime cross A prime.
This is good for us because we
can apply theorem 1 to this.
And, this inequality,
you're kind of ruling out
the enemy scenario.
We're ruling out the possibility
that there's a big chunk
of A prime cross B prime
that got compressed,
even though the
whole thing didn't.
OK.
Let me put over
here, some intuition.
So, my intuition is that A prime
cross B prime is very symmetric.
And so, let me draw an
exaggerated version.
Suppose that A prime cross B
prime does look like a lattice.
And inside of there, we
have some substantial but
unstructured set, y.
So, if there were some angle
where the projection of y
got compressed a lot, I
claim that compression
of the whole lattice should
get compressed a lot.
Why?
Because the lattice
is symmetric.
So I can cover the lattice
by some translates of y.
And if each of those
gets compressed a lot,
then the whole lattice
should be compressed a lot.
So, we cover A prime cross B
prime by a few translates of y.
And then we would get that the
projection of the whole thing
should be bounded by a few
times, the projection of y.
So, now, let's carry
out this intuition.
We are going to cover
y, cover A prime,
cover something,
by translates of y.
So, let's consider
y plus T1, T2.
These are some
translates of y, a set
of these guys, where T1
is an A prime cross A
prime, minus A prime.
And T2 is in this slightly
weird-looking thing there.
And so, these are a
bunch of translates of y.
And these translates of y
cover somebody a lot of times.
So, for every y1, y2--
let me do it this way.
For every A1, A2,
and A prime cross
A prime, and for
every y1, y2, and y,
there is a unique T1, T2,
which is in this list,
so that y1, y2, plus
T1, T2, is a1, a2.
So this is easier to prove
than it is to write down.
Just solve for T1.
T1 must be a1 minus Y1.
And these guys both
live in A prime.
So, T1 is in there.
And, ah, wait.
Yeah, sorry.
So this is going to have to
be negative 1 over T1a prime.
OK, now, how does y2 work?
So, T2 is going
to be a2 minus y2.
And the a2 lives in B prime.
Yeah.
So, the a2 lives here.
And the y2 lives here.
So the difference lives
here, where it's supposed to.
So, these translates of
y cover A prime cross
negative 1 over T1a prime.
They cover it y times.
They cover each
point in here y times
because, for each point
in here, I have norm of y,
cardinality of y
choices for this guy.
And then there's
one in translation,
a set of translations
that lands here.
Does this sentence make sense?
So we have rigged it, that we've
taken a bunch of translations
of this set, y.
And we have covered a
nice product many times.
And the product, we actually
could have arranged the product
to be A prime cross B prime.
That would have been a little
easier than what we did.
But we have arranged that the
product that we've covered
is A prime cross a
dilation of A prime.
And that's a little bit
better, technically,
because it's going to
be closer to theorem 1.
Now, notice that this guy
is small by hypothesis.
And this set here is also small.
This is just a dilate of this.
So these sets are small.
So we took a few
translations of y.
And we covered this
product many times.
And that means that,
at least, typically,
each of these translations was
covering a lot of the product.
So that matches this intuition.
So, then, we can say that pi
T of A prime cross minus 1
over T, T1a prime, that
guy is bounded by--
OK, so we're going to take
A prime minus A prime,
times A prime plus T1 B prime.
This is how many
copies of y we took.
For each one of them,
we have a projection.
So that has the size, pi T of y.
And after doing that, we've
covered every point here
y times.
So we have this guy.
These are hypothesis
bounded by N.
So this is N squared
over y, pi T of y.
And that's basically
our final inequality.
Put the pi T of y by itself.
Pi T of y is greater, tilde,
tilde, y over N squared, times
the size of this
thingy, which is
equivalent to pi negative T
over T1, A prime cross A prime.
OK, take a moment with that.
OK.
So, now, let's finish the
proof of the BKT theorem.
All right.
So, we would like to estimate
the maximum T in our direction
set of pi T of x.
That's at least the
maximum T in our direction
set of pi T of x prime.
We're following
up from over here.
And here's x prime, which is
a big chunk of A prime cross
B prime.
And now, we can apply our lemma.
The lemma says, that
is at least as big
as the maximum T in our
direction set, x prime over N
squared.
And then we have pi negative T
over T1, A prime cross A prime.
Now, x prime, we
already determined,
has a size of about N squared.
So this factor disappears.
And now, we are
looking at projections
in many different directions
of A prime cross A prime.
That's exactly the thing
that theorem 1 told us about.
So, by theorem 1, this is
now greater [INAUDIBLE]
N times p to the epsilon 1.
And that's the proof.
So, one of these is
significantly bigger
than the square root of x
times p to the epsilon 1.
OK.
Let me put up on here a
little summary of what we did.
And then I'll let you look down
from above at the whole thing.
So, we're trying to get from
theorem 1 to theorem BKT.
And the enemy was that we
have a set x in A cross A,
where x is around the
same size as A cross A.
But the size of
the projection of x
is much smaller than the size
of the projection of A cross.
A. That's our enemy.
And we learned two pieces
of wisdom about this enemy,
one in the BSG theorem,
and one in the lemma.
So, wisdom one, in
the enemy situation,
x lives in a smaller product.
And the projection of
the smaller product--
the projection of
the smaller product,
well, it doesn't live in that.
But it has a--
so the enemy situation
implies that x,
intersected with a smaller
product, is about the same as x.
So, a good chunk of x
lives in a smaller product.
And the projection of
the smaller product
is about the same as
the projection of x.
Then we look at that situation.
And the second
piece of wisdom was
that, if the projection of a
smaller product, of a product--
if this is small, so if this is
around the smallest it could be,
it would be one of the
factors for one T1.
Then this product
becomes very symmetrical.
And then the conclusion is,
for any subset, x prime,
in this thing, which
is substantial,
then the projection
of the subset
actually is around the
same as the projection
of the whole product.
So the enemy situation
can only really happen
because x was mostly in
a smaller product that
had a small projection.
And this situation
is very symmetrical.
So if a smaller product has
one small projection, then when
you project it in other
angles, then the projection
of a big piece of it
can't be way smaller
than the projection
of the whole thing.
All right.
So, the whole story
is on these boards.
Take a couple of
moments to look it over.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Professor?
So, should it be the case that
the A prime there depends on T?
PROFESSOR: OK, so
the question is
whether A prime
depends on T. So,
let's see where
A prime appeared.
So we have our set with
many small projections.
And, OK.
And then, in particular,
the T1 projection is small.
And so, the
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers theorem
says there's A prime
in A and B prime in B,
so that the T1 projection of A
prime cross B prime is small.
And this A prime depends on T1.
Now, later, we're going to look
at pi T of x for other T's.
One could, I guess, apply
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers again
to those other T's.
But that's not what
we're going to do.
We use T1 to find A
prime and B prime.
And then we're going to run with
these same A prime and B prime,
even when we look at other T's.
What did we learn?
Once we have this one small
projection, we learned--
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
told us this.
And then we learned from
it some other stuff.
So, what we actually
used is this.
So, then, we used this stack.
So this is telling us
that A prime cross B
prime is quite symmetrical.
And that's what's helpful
in the second part.
AUDIENCE: OK, cool.
Thanks.
PROFESSOR: Good.
Other questions or comments?
AUDIENCE: Why don't we
know that A itself is also
kind of symmetrical?
PROFESSOR: Yeah, the
question is, why don't we
know that A itself is
also kind of symmetrical?
That might depend on exactly
what we mean by symmetrical.
But an important
thing, an important way
that A prime is better than
A is that, at this moment,
A prime minus A prime is small.
And we didn't know that about
A. You can think of A prime
as being A prime
plus some garbage.
And the garbage minus
garbage is not small.
AUDIENCE: So, [INAUDIBLE]
epsilon is different between
the two because of the A
prime plus minus A prime has--
there's a hidden
factor there, right?
PROFESSOR: Yes, A prime
plus, minus, A prime.
Here, there's a
hidden factor, which
is p to the order of epsilon.
And you're right.
It's very important
that the epsilon
is different between
the two theorems.
So, epsilon 1 is the
epsilon in theorem 1, which
was already kind
of small, if we had
unwound the proof of theorem 1.
And then, in theorem
BKT, there's an epsilon.
And epsilon in BKT is way
smaller than the epsilon 1.
And the reason we
need that is, OK, we
started with this, where we have
a factor of p to the epsilon.
Then we did some stuff.
Most important stuff is BSG.
So, BSG, we'll lose--
there'll be a factor
of 10 epsilon here
that comes out of the proof
of Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers.
So, here, these things
will be something
like p to the 10 epsilon,
if you did them carefully.
And then you go along.
And we're following our proof.
So, here, we did a
little bit more work
in the proof of the lemma.
So, this is hiding a
p of 10 or 20 epsilon.
But, here, we have a gain
of p to the epsilon 1.
So, the p to the epsilon
1 needs to dominate the p
to the 20 epsilon that
we lost at various steps
in this process.
So, epsilon should be 1/20
of the size of epsilon 1.
Yeah, so we have to do a whole
sequence of clever things
to prove
Bourgain-Katz-Tao theorem.
And each time we do
something clever,
epsilon gets smaller
by a factor of 10,
until we're so clever that we
really can't see the epsilon.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Is there a
conjectured boundary
for what the largest
possible epsilon could be?
PROFESSOR: Ah, that's
a great question.
Yeah, so, the
question is, is there
a conjectured bound
about the right epsilon?
Yes.
So, yes.
So, the conjecture, so
we're working right now
over finite fields.
And the conjecture is that
the worst case is a lattice.
And we wrote it down.
Let's write it down again.
But we wrote it down at the
beginning of the course.
So I think we're moving on.
I'll put it here.
So, suppose we have x, which
is a subset of Fp squared.
And then we're going to take the
maximum t and D of pi t of x.
And this is bigger than--
I think it was D to
the 1/2, x to the 1/2.
Maybe you should check it
I don't remember these.
I don't quite remember this
off the top of my head.
So, I think.
And the way to remember
it is that the example
is that x is a lattice.
And then D is the set of
rational numbers of small slope.
That was the case with--
the case that we've seen so far,
where the projections are small.
So if you compute with this, you
can check whether this is true
or whether it needs to
be modified a little bit.
And then, if you rewrite
it in the language of BKT,
it gives you an exact
formula for epsilon.
And that is a wide-open
problem over FP.
But the version over
r has been proven.
And I'll try, at least,
to say at least some
of the main ideas of
the proof in the class.
Yeah, OK.
So, the ideas that we've just
been talking about, going
back and forth between whether a
projection of the whole product
is small, whether a projection
of a big chunk of the product
is small, that is a theme
in additive combinatorics.
And I want to describe to you
some of the other key words
and ideas behind that theme
to flesh out the lecture
and see how it fits
in, in general.
OK.
All right.
So, this section is
called additive energy
versus the size of
A plus B. So, these
are two points of
view about measuring
the additive structure involved
when you add numbers in A
to numbers in B.
This one, we've already met.
Let me tell you what
additive energy is.
So, the definition, if
A and B are contained
in an abelian group,
the energy of AB
is the number of quadruples.
A1 and A2 are in A.
B1 and B2 are in B,
so that A1 plus B1 is
equal to A2 plus B2.
OK.
So, if you add
numbers from A and B,
how many coincidences are there?
Does it frequently happen
that you get the same number?
So, another way of
thinking about it
is we could say, r, AB of z, so
the number of representations
of z as a sum of somebody
in A and somebody in B.
So this is the number of
AB, so that A plus B is--
and the additive energy, AB, is
also equal to the sum over z,
rAB of z, squared.
So if this is large,
it means there
are a lot of numbers
that can be written as A
plus B in many different ways.
There are many
additive coincidences.
So, for reference, if
A and B both have size,
N, then let's
think about how big
or how small the
additive energy could be.
It's at least N squared.
That happens if--
so, there are N
squared obvious solutions to
this, which are, A1 equals A2.
And B1 equals B2.
And if you have a
random set of integers
or a random subset
of a big group,
those might be the
only solutions.
So, here, we have only
trivial quadruples, OK?
And energy is at most N
cubed, because once you've
picked three of
these, the fourth one
is determined by this equation.
So there's, at most, N cubed
of these additive quadruples.
And this happens if A equals
B, equals A subgroup of z.
A and B are subgroup of z.
And there's always
a choice of B2
you can pick to
solve this equation.
OK, cool.
So, having large
energy is having
a lot of additive structure.
And, before, we were thinking
that, if A plus B is small,
then that would mean there's
a lot of additive structure.
How are those related
to each other?
OK.
So, there's a lemma that says,
A times B, A squared times
B squared, is, at most,
the size of A plus B,
times the energy between A
and B. And the proof of this
is just Cauchy-Schwarz.
So, if I add up on z, rAB of
z, I get the size of A times
the size of B. This
is by double counting.
So, every time I add somebody
in A and somebody in B,
I get some z.
I add this up and
get all the pairs.
So, now, A times B is
the sum, z, of rAB of z.
And in this sum, I only need
to count the guys in A plus B,
because z cannot be
written as A plus B at all.
It means that this was 0.
Now, I Cauchy-Schwarz.
So I'm going to write it as the
sum for A plus B of 1 to the 1/2
half, and the sum, rAB
of z squared to the 1/2.
So that's the size of
A plus B to the 1/2,
times the energy to the 1/2.
And that's the proof.
All right.
So we see from this that,
if A plus B is small,
then the energy must be large.
We could bring the A plus
B over to the other side.
So, people usually write this.
The energy is at least A squared
times B squared, over A plus B.
So, for instance, if
A and B have size, N,
and A plus B is almost
N, then the energy
would be at least
around N cubed,
which is as big as it could be.
All right.
So, A plus B small implies
that the energy is large.
Now, do people think you
can go the other way?
If the energy is
large, does that
imply that A plus B is small?
AUDIENCE: No, because of course,
you can have some garbage.
PROFESSOR: Good, no because
Good.
So, energy of AB large does not
imply that A plus B is small.
The example is that A
equals B, equals numbers up
to N, somebody with a lot
of additive structure,
union, some garbage.
Good.
Now, if you look at the
definition of the energy,
if I add some extra
elements to A or to B,
it can only increase the
energy, perhaps not very much.
So the energy of this
example is at least
the energy of this
example, which is large.
On the other hand, the garbage
can make this a lot bigger.
And this is basically
the same example
that we've been
grappling with all class.
OK, cool.
So, now, I'll leave that up.
All right.
OK.
Now, if the energy
of A and B is small,
that implies that the
size of A plus B is large.
That's just the contrapositive
of what we wrote before,
or you can see it
from this formula.
This is small.
Then this one must be large.
Right, OK.
Now, all right.
Now, suppose I have a set, x,
in A cross B. And I look at
pi1 of x.
So remember that
pi1 of A cross B
is just A plus B. So when I take
pi1 of x, it's like A plus B.
But I don't take all the pairs.
I just take the pairs in x.
All right.
So, even if pi1 of x were
small, if x was a large set
and pi1 of x were
small, that would still
produce a lot of energy
because that would still
be a lot of numbers,
a bunch of numbers,
z, that have many
representations of A plus B.
Let me just write it
down OK, so, yeah.
So, actually, so let me recall
that A plus B large, and x being
a big fraction of A
times B, that does not
imply that pi1 of x is large.
And this is, again,
the main thing
that we were struggling with.
But with energy, this is true.
So, lemma, let me check
exactly what it says.
All right.
So, lemma, x
squared is less than
or equal to pi 1 of x,
times the energy of AB.
So if the energy
is small, then pi 1
of x is pretty big
for every subset, x,
for every large subset, x.
The proof is almost the
same as the previous proof.
So, proof, rx of z
is the number of ways
of writing A plus B equal to
z, where the pair, AB, is in x.
And that's smaller than
representations of z
as a general sum of
sum between A and B,
because we're only taking
a portion of the sums.
OK.
So, now, x is the
sum on z of rx of z.
And, here, in this sum, we only
have to take z's in pi 1 of x.
We only have to consider
those z's that can
be written as the form, A plus
B, where A and B are in x.
So, now, we can
Cauchy-Schwarz this.
And we get the size, pi1 of x to
the 1/2, times an energy thing,
which is smaller than
the standard energy.
So we have the sum, rx
of z squared to the 1/2.
That's smaller than the sum
rAB of z squared to the 1/2,
which gives us the energy.
OK, cool.
So to summarize,
having small energy
implies that the
sum set is large.
But it's stronger than that.
And it also implies
that pi1 of x
is large for all substantial
subsets of A cross B.
So it's stronger, in a way,
which is exactly what we
needed in our discussion.
So that suggests a better
version of theorem 1
that we could have
tried to prove.
Let's erase this lemma.
So, remember, theorem
1 said that, if we
take the projection of A cross A
in many directions, one of them
has a large cardinality.
But we could have
proved, we could
have tried to prove something
stronger, that one of them
has a small energy.
Let me write it down.
It's true.
And it's a theorem.
Theorem 2 says-- all right.
So if A is a subset of Fp,
size of A is p to the SA,
0 less than SA, less
than 1 D is in Fp.
Size of D is p to the SD.
0 is less than SD.
Then I'm going to consider
all the directions
and pick the best one.
And instead of looking
at the size of A plus TA,
I'm going to look at the
energy of A, comma TA.
And I'll take the
minimum over all the T.
OK.
So, the biggest this energy
could be is p to the 3SA.
It's the maximum
possible energy.
And we're going to say, it's
a little bit better than this.
Now, because of this
lemma, we automatically
get not only a lower bound
on pi T of A cross A.
But we get a lower bound on pi T
of any big subset of A cross A.
So, this automatically
gives the BKT theorem.
So, in fact, this easily
implies a strong version
of the BKT theorem, which I
think was also proven by BKT.
And it says that--
so, sorry.
x is p to the sx.
And D is as above.
So, not only you can say, the
maximum T and D, pi T of x
is large.
So, that's the regular theorem.
And this follows from theorem
2, and using our lemma.
But we could say that--
so, this is true.
But, even better, there is
some T and D so that, if y--
so if y is a subset of x and
it's a substantial subset of x,
then pi T of y is big.
OK.
So, the proof from here to
here, we observed earlier
that we can reduce to the case.
Well, OK.
Yeah, I guess I should say,
using Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
we could reduce
to the case where
x is a big subset of A cross A.
And then y is a big subset of x.
So y is a big
subset of A cross A.
And then you use the
energy bound to get this.
OK.
So, then, we say, proof
of theorem 2 plus BKT2
are similar to what
we did in class.
So, they could be good optional
exercises, or some pieces of it
might be required exercises.
And I thought I
should mention this.
One of the things that
Pablo impressed on me when
we were talking over
the vacation week
was that this slightly
stronger version
is important in applications.
Most of the
applications actually
depend on being able to say
the slightly stronger thing.
OK OK.
So, now, you might think,
you might ask yourself,
maybe energy is
actually a better thing
to be talking about because
a bound for the energy
is kind of stable,
undertaking large subsets.
And so, maybe, we should have
been talking about energy
all along.
And it's reasonable to ask, if
you take our proof of theorem 1
and you just try to change all
the cardinalities to energies,
could you adapt it and
prove theorem 2, instead?
And you can't do that.
And it's a good moment to recap
the main idea in theorem 1,
and also a way of reflecting
on the different big tools
and how they're
related to each other.
All right.
Let's look at this.
Maybe, now, I can
erase the BSG theorem.
OK.
Actually, before I
erase the BSG theorem,
let me make a little
comment about it.
So, there are a couple
of closely-related forms
of the theorem.
And another way I often say it
is that, if the energy of AB
is large, then there must
be A prime and B prime,
so that the cardinality of A
prime plus B prime is small.
Maybe I should write it, yeah.
Let me put it here.
So, theorem BSG variant.
This is the way it's
most commonly said.
So I would be a bit remiss
not to show it to you.
So if A and B are
in an abelian group,
and let's say A and B have size,
at most, N. And the energy of AB
is large.
Energy of AB is greater
than A inverse N cubed.
Then it may not be
the case that A plus B
is small because of the
example with garbage.
But we can get rid
of the garbage.
So there exists A prime in A and
B prime in B, so that A prime--
yes, so that they
are substantial.
So, A prime and B prime are
greater than or equal to K
to the minus order of 1n.
And A prime plus B prime is less
than or equal to K to the order
of 1N.
So if we can locate the
correct structured parts,
then their subset is small,
after we remove some garbage.
Yeah, OK.
All right.
So, now, let me
remind you of one
of the key ideas in
the proof of theorem 1.
Key idea in the
proof of theorem 1.
So, the key idea was based on
the Plünnecke-Ruzsa inequality.
And it was an idea that I
called, contagious structure.
So, it's said, if A plus T1a is
small and A plus T2a is small,
then A plus T1 plus
T2a is also small--
not quite as small,
but still pretty small.
All right.
So, this was the key thing.
If A plus TA is small
for a bunch of T and D,
then it would have to be small
for an even bigger set of D
by adding D, or by multiplying
D, or by taking negatives.
And then there would be
a huge set of T's, where
A plus TA was small.
And then that contradicts
basic double counting.
That was the proof.
OK.
So, what if we tried to
work with energy throughout?
So, instead of trying to
prove that A plus TA is big,
we're going to try to prove
that the energy is small.
So, we're doing a
proof by contradiction.
So the analogous
question would be,
if the energy between
A and T1 of A is large,
and the energy between
A and T2 of A is large,
then does that imply that the
energy between A and T1 plus T2A
is large?
OK.
The answer is no.
And it is the same issue that
we saw before, that when we say,
the energy is large, it means
there's at least a piece of A
and a piece of T1A that are
very friendly with each other.
But it doesn't have
to be all of them.
So, one piece of A must
be very friendly with T1A.
And one piece of A must
be very friendly with T2A.
But those could be two different
pieces of A. And in that case,
we can't really
learn anything more.
It doesn't mean there's
any piece of A that's
friendly with both of them.
So, here's the example.
The answer is no.
Here's the example.
So, A might be the
numbers up to N, union T1
times the numbers up to N, union
T2 times the numbers up to N.
OK.
So, then, T1A would
be T1 numbers up
to N union, dot, dot, dot.
T2A is T2 numbers up to
N, union, dot, dot, dot.
So, these two guys
are very friendly,
not just because they're
the same as each other.
Not everybody who's
the same as each other
is friends, but
because they have
a lot of additive structures.
And, therefore,
this guy is large.
And these two guys
are very friendly.
And therefore,
this guy is large.
But there's nothing
going on with T1.
Plus, T1 and T2 are
totally arbitrary.
T1 plus T2, we would not
typically have this large.
So, all right.
If a, T1 plus T2A
is typically small.
OK, cool.
So it was actually kind of
crucial in our proof of theorem
1 to talk about the cardinality
of the subset instead
of the energy because,
in that setting,
we have the Plünnecke-Ruzsa
inequalities.
And we get a great
deal of structure
from a single
subset being small.
We get lots of other things.
On the other hand, it is nice,
eventually, to get to theorem 2,
because theorem 2 is stable.
If you replace the
actual product,
A cross A, by a subset,
which is almost all of it.
So, both looking at cardinality
and looking at energy
have good features.
Energy estimates are
stable, undertaking subsets.
And the cardinality estimates
have this contagious structure
thing.
Those are both very helpful.
And Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
this is important
because, even though
having a big energy
is not synonymous with
having a small subset,
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers says
they're very closely-related.
And so, by using
Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers,
you can often get the
best of both worlds.
So if you were to
pretend that you
could have all the good
features of an energy bound,
and all the good features
of a cardinality bound
to see what you could
prove, very often,
you can prove those things by
using Balog-Szemeredi-Gowers
to move back and forth.
Pablo gave the analysis
seminar a few weeks ago.
And he gave an overview
of recent developments
in projection theory.
And he made the
claim, or suggestion,
that this theorem might be one
of the most important or most
used theorems in math in
the last several decades.
It was a little provocative.
I thought it was interesting.
And I have gradually been
appreciating it more and more.
I'm learning about it.
Anyway, I've been gradually
appreciating it more and more.
And, yeah, probably,
as we keep going,
we'll see how this
keeps being important.